Create authorization_and_authentication.md (#19758)
sourcegraph/sourcegraph: doc/admin/config/authorization_and_authentication.md

# Authentication and authorization in Sourcegraph

Sourcegraph has two authentication concepts to be mindful of:

> 1. The system through which your users log in (SAML IdP, OAuth with a code host, username/password, OpenId Connect, Authentication Proxy)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The system through which your users log in (SAML IdP, OAuth with a code host, username/password, OpenID Connect, Authentication Proxy)
```

2. The system which controls user permissions (Code host, explicit permissions API in Sourcegraph)

We suggest configuring both to use Sourcegraph Enterprise. If you do not configure permissions, all users will be able to see all of the code in the instance.

## Authentication in Sourcegraph

> Sourcegraph supports username/password auth by default and SAML, OAuth, HTTP Proxy auth, and OpenId Connect if configured. Changing a username in Sourcegraph will allow the user to escalate permissions, so if you are syncing permissions, you will need to add:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sourcegraph supports username/password auth by default and SAML, OAuth, HTTP Proxy auth, and OpenID Connect if configured. Changing a username in Sourcegraph will allow the user to escalate permissions, so if you are syncing permissions, you will need to add:
```

```

auth.enableUsernameChanges: false

```

To your site config at https://sourcegraph.yourdomain.com/siteadmin/configuration ([more info](./site_config.md#view-and-edit-site-configuration)). 

For users using any of the other authentication mechanisms, removing `builtin` as an authentication mechanism is best practice. (Customers in a managed instance environment will need to leave `builtin` enabled for Sourcegraph employee access. Consult with your Customer Engineer for more info.)

## Authorization in Sourcegraph

> If you use Github, Gitlab, or Bitbucket Server, you can sync access permissions directly from the code host. Information is included in the section for the code host below. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you use GitHub, GitLab, or Bitbucket Server, you can sync access permissions directly from the code host. Information is included in the section for the code host below. 
```

If you do not use one of those listed code hosts, you will need to control access using our explicit permissions API, discussed below.

## Username normalization

Sourcegraph does not support email-style usernames. In contexts in which you are providing the username to Sourcegraph, it will be normalized, which can impact username matching where that is relevant. [Full documentation is available here](../auth/index.md#username-normalization).

## Instructions for individual authentication/authorization pathways

We recommend that you start at the instructions for your code host, if listed, for a complete explanation of the authentication/authorization options available to you when using that code host.

### Built-in username/password authentication

> This is Sourcegraph’s default authentication option. To enable it, add the to your site config:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is Sourcegraph’s default authentication option. To enable it, add the following to your site config:
```

```

> {
> // Other config settings go here
>   "auth.providers": [{
> ​   "type": "builtin",
>     "allowSignup": true 
>   }]
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{
  // Other config settings go here
  "auth.providers": [
    {
      "type": "builtin",
      "allowSignup": true 
    }
  ]
}
```

```

Set `allowSignup` to `false` if you want to create user accounts instead of allowing the user to create their own.

> More info [here](../auth/index.md#builtin-password-authentication). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More info about [builtin password authentication](../auth/index.md#builtin-password-authentication). 
```

> ### Github Enterprise or Github Cloud Authentication and Authorization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### GitHub Enterprise or GitHub Cloud authentication and authorization
```

> Github supports both permissions syncing and authentication (through OAuth). If you use Github as your code host, we do not officially support using another authentication mechanism (SAML, etc.). Instead, you’ll need to follow this flow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We support both authentication and permissions syncing (through OAuth) for GitHub. If you use GitHub as your code host, we do not officially support using another authentication mechanism (SAML, etc.). Instead, you’ll need to follow this flow:
```

> 1. Use SAML (or another auth mechanism) to log in to Github

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Use SAML (or another auth mechanism) to log in to GitHub
```

> 2. Use Github OAuth to log in to Sourcegraph

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Use GitHub OAuth to log in to Sourcegraph
```

In this way, access to Sourcegraph will still be managed by your identity provider, using the code host as a middle step.

> [Follow these steps to configure authentication with Github via OAuth](../auth/index.md#github). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Follow these steps to configure authentication with GitHub via OAuth](../auth/index.md#github). 
```

> Once that is configured, follow [these steps](../repo/permissions.md#github) to configure access permissions. Users will log into Sourcegraph using Github OAuth, and permissions will be synced in the background.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once that is configured, follow [these steps to configure access permissions](../repo/permissions.md#github). Users will log into Sourcegraph using Github OAuth, and permissions will be synced in the background.
```

> ### Gitlab Enterprise or Cloud Authentication and Authorization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### GitLab Enterprise or GiLab Cloud authentication and authorization
```

> Gitlab supports both permissions syncing and authentication (through OAuth). If you use Gitlab as your code host, you have two available authentication flows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We support both authentication and permissions syncing (through OAuth) for GitLab. If you use GitLab as your code host, you have two available authentication flows:
```

> 1. Use SAML (or another auth mechanism) to log in to Gitlab

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Use SAML (or another auth mechanism) to log in to GitLab
```

> 2. Use Gitlab OAuth to log in to Sourcegraph

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Use GitLab OAuth to log in to Sourcegraph
```

> In this way, access to Sourcegraph will still be managed by your identity provider, using the code host as a middle step. This option is the simplest to configure. To do so, follow [these instructions](../auth/index.md#gitlab) to set up Gitlab as an authentication option, and then [these instructions](../repo/permissions.md#oauth-application) to enable permissions syncing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this way, access to Sourcegraph will still be managed by your identity provider, using the code host as a middle step. This option is the simplest to configure. To do so, [set up GitLab as an authentication option](../auth/index.md#gitlab), and then [enable permissions syncing](../repo/permissions.md#oauth-application).
```

> Alternatively, you can configure SAML authentication in to Sourcegraph, and use Gitlab permissions syncing in the background to control access permissions. To implement this method, you will need to make sure that Gitlab is able to return a value in `identities.provider` for the `GET /users` endpoint ([Gitlab documentation](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/api/users.html#for-admins)) that your identity provider is able to pass as the `nameId` in the SAML response. If that isn’t possible, you will need to use the first option. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can configure SAML authentication in to Sourcegraph, and use GitLab permissions syncing in the background to control access permissions. To implement this method, you will need to make sure that GitLab is able to return a value in `identities.provider` for the `GET /users` endpoint ([GitLab documentation](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/api/users.html#for-admins)) that your identity provider is able to pass as the `nameID` in the SAML response. If that isn’t possible, you will need to use the first option. 
```

> To configure SAML auth with Gitlab permissions, you will need to first [configure permissions from Gitlab](../repo/permissions.md#administrator-sudo-level-access-token). Then, [configure SAML authentication](../auth/saml/index.md). The `nameId` passed by the Identity Provider will need to match the value of `identities.provider`. For example, if the Gitlab API returns:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure SAML auth with GitLab permissions, you will need to first [configure permissions from GitLab](../repo/permissions.md#administrator-sudo-level-access-token). Then, [configure SAML authentication](../auth/saml/index.md). The `nameID` passed by the identity provider will need to match the value of `identities.provider`. For example, if the GitLab API returns:
```

```

> "identities": [
>    {"provider": "saml", "extern_uid": "email@domain.com"}
>    ]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"identities": [
   {"provider": "saml", "extern_uid": "email@domain.com"}
]
```

```

You will need to configure permission in Sourcegraph as:

```

> {
>  "url": "https://gitlab.com",
>  "token": "$PERSONAL_ACCESS_TOKEN",
>  "authorization": {
>   "identityProvider": {
>    "type": "external",
>    "authProviderID": "$AUTH_PROVIDER_ID",
>    "authProviderType": "$AUTH_PROVIDER_TYPE",
>    "gitlabProvider": "saml"
>   }
>  }
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{
  "url": "https://gitlab.com",
  "token": "$PERSONAL_ACCESS_TOKEN",
  "authorization": {
    "identityProvider": {
      "type": "external",
      "authProviderID": "$AUTH_PROVIDER_ID",
      "authProviderType": "$AUTH_PROVIDER_TYPE",
      "gitlabProvider": "saml"
    }
  }
}
```

```

> And configure the identity provider to pass the email address as the `nameId`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And configure the identity provider to pass the email address as the `nameID`. 
```

> ### Bitbucket Server Authorization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Bitbucket Server authorization
```

> We do not currently support OAuth for Bitbucket Server. You will need to combine permissions syncing from Bitbucket Server with another auth mechanism (SAML, built-in auth, HTTP authentication proxies). Bitbucket only passes usernames to Sourcegraph, so you’ll need to make sure that those usernames are matched by whatever mechanism you chose to use for access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We do not currently support OAuth for Bitbucket Server. You will need to combine permissions syncing from Bitbucket Server with another auth mechanism (SAML, built-in auth, HTTP authentication proxies). Bitbucket Server only passes usernames to Sourcegraph, so you’ll need to make sure that those usernames are matched by whatever mechanism you chose to use for access.
```

To sync Bitbucket server permissions, follow [these instructions](../repo/permissions.md#bitbucket-server). Then, do one of the following:

1. Create the user accounts in Sourcegraph with matching usernames. (Access using `builtin` auth.)

> 2. [Configure SAML authentication](../auth/saml/index.md). If you are using Bitbucket server, the `login` attribute is *not* optional—you need to pass the Bitbucket username as the `login` attribute. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. [Configure SAML authentication](../auth/saml/index.md). If you are using Bitbucket Server, the `login` attribute is *not* optional—you need to pass the Bitbucket Server username as the `login` attribute. 
```

> 3. [Configure an HTTP authentication proxy](../auth/index.md#http-authentication-proxies), passing the Bitbucket username value as the `usernameHeader`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. [Configure an HTTP authentication proxy](../auth/index.md#http-authentication-proxies), passing the Bitbucket Server username value as the `usernameHeader`. 
```

> ### Explicit Permissions API Authorization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Explicit Permissions API authorization
```

> With any authentication mechanism, you can use our graphQL API to set permissions for all repositories. If you choose to do this, this is the *only* mechanism that can be used for permissions—all others will be ignored. Follow [these instructions](../repo/permissions.md#explicit-permissions-api) for the mutations needed within the graphQL API to configure access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With any authentication mechanism, you can use our GraphQL API to set permissions for all repositories. If you choose to do this, this is the *only* mechanism that can be used for permissions—all others will be ignored. Follow [these instructions](../repo/permissions.md#explicit-permissions-api) for the mutations needed within the GraphQL API to configure access.
```

> ### OpenId Connect Authentication

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### OpenID Connect authentication
```

BTW, why is this section not above any other authorization sections?

Use this option if accessing using OpenID Connect, such as when logging in through a Google Workspace, or if other auth methods aren’t an option. [See setup instructions here](../auth/index.md#openid-connect). 

> ### HTTP Authentication Proxy Authentication

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### HTTP authentication proxy authentication
```

Same question

# Authentication and authorization in Sourcegraph

> Sourcegraph has two authentication concepts to be mindful of:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sourcegraph has two authentication concepts:
```

1. The system through which your users log in (SAML IdP, OAuth with a code host, username/password, OpenID Connect, Authentication Proxy)
2. The system which controls user permissions (Code host, explicit permissions API in Sourcegraph)

> We suggest configuring both to use Sourcegraph Enterprise. If you do not configure permissions, all users will be able to see all of the code in the instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We suggest configuring both when using Sourcegraph Enterprise. If you do not configure permissions, all users will be able to see all of the code in the instance.
```

## Authentication in Sourcegraph

Sourcegraph supports username/password auth by default and SAML, OAuth, HTTP Proxy auth, and OpenID Connect if configured. Changing a username in Sourcegraph will allow the user to escalate permissions, so if you are syncing permissions, you will need to add:

```

auth.enableUsernameChanges: false

```

To your site config at https://sourcegraph.yourdomain.com/siteadmin/configuration ([more info](./site_config.md#view-and-edit-site-configuration)). 

For users using any of the other authentication mechanisms, removing `builtin` as an authentication mechanism is best practice. (Customers in a managed instance environment will need to leave `builtin` enabled for Sourcegraph employee access. Consult with your Customer Engineer for more info.)

## Authorization in Sourcegraph

> If you use GitHub, GitLab, or Bitbucket Server, you can sync access permissions directly from the code host. Information is included in the section for the code host below. 

Reviewer 2: Proposal:

>If you use GitHub, GitLab, or Bitbucket Server, you can [sync access permissions directly from the code host](#). ~Information is included in the section for the code host below.~

We should generally [avoid directional language](https://about.sourcegraph.com/handbook/communication/content_guidelines/style_and_mechanics#avoid-directional-language). Instead, it'd be ideal to [link directly to the section as part of the sentence](https://about.sourcegraph.com/handbook/communication/content_guidelines/actionable_language#links).

> If you do not use one of those listed code hosts, you will need to control access using our explicit permissions API, discussed below.

Reviewer 2: >If you do not use one of those listed code hosts, you will need to [control access using our explicit permissions API](#).

Same as the previous convention.

## Username normalization

> Sourcegraph does not support email-style usernames. In contexts in which you are providing the username to Sourcegraph, it will be normalized, which can impact username matching where that is relevant. [Full documentation is available here](../auth/index.md#username-normalization).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sourcegraph does not support email-style usernames. In contexts in which you are providing the username to Sourcegraph, it will be normalized, which can impact username matching where that is relevant. See [full documentation for username normalization](../auth/index.md#username-normalization).
```

## Instructions for individual authentication/authorization pathways

We recommend that you start at the instructions for your code host, if listed, for a complete explanation of the authentication/authorization options available to you when using that code host.

### Built-in username/password authentication

> This is Sourcegraph’s default authentication option. To enable it, add the following to your site config:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Built-in username/password authentication is Sourcegraph’s default authentication option. To enable it, add the following to your site config:
```

I just realized this particular convention isn't in the content guidelines (I'll add it), but where a {thing} is stated in a headline, we should avoid starting the paragraph with "This," as it's not necessarily clear what "This" refers to, particularly when readers have English as a second language.

Author: Super solid, thanks.

```
{
  // Other config settings go here
  "auth.providers": [
    {
      "type": "builtin",
      "allowSignup": true 
    }
  ]
}
```

Set `allowSignup` to `false` if you want to create user accounts instead of allowing the user to create their own.

> More info about [builtin password authentication](../auth/index.md#builtin-password-authentication). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
More info about [built-in password authentication](../auth/index.md#builtin-password-authentication). 
```

Author: @quinnkeast Style question—I'm using `builtin` here because that's the name of the attribute in the site config (styled in that way). Do we still want to change this?

Reviewer 2: Shoot, this is a tricky one. Looking at the docs, the way we're using it right now is as a noun, "Builtin," rather than an adjective, "built-in." I'm not sure that's what we want to be doing, but I'm also not 100% comfortable changing it outright...

Options:
1. Use "built-in" everywhere except for the attribute in the config itself, where we keep `builtin`. Correct, but potential source of error if users assume the attribute is `built-in`.
2. Use "builtin" everywhere. Consistent, but also looks like a writing error, which I feel reflects poorly on "Sourcegraph's attention to detail" and the design principle "[trust is earned](https://about.sourcegraph.com/handbook/product/design_principles)."
3. Use a mix. I'd prefer not.

I lean towards #1. Wdyt?

Author: @quinnkeast Option #1 seems fine to me! :) Went ahead and changed it to be built-in in text and `builtin` when referencing the attribute. I agree with you the "right" option looks wrong.)

### GitHub Enterprise or GitHub Cloud authentication and authorization

We support both authentication and permissions syncing (through OAuth) for GitHub. If you use GitHub as your code host, we do not officially support using another authentication mechanism (SAML, etc.). Instead, you’ll need to follow this flow:

1. Use SAML (or another auth mechanism) to log in to GitHub
2. Use GitHub OAuth to log in to Sourcegraph

In this way, access to Sourcegraph will still be managed by your identity provider, using the code host as a middle step.

> [Follow these steps to configure authentication with GitHub via OAuth](../auth/index.md#github). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Follow these steps to [configure authentication with GitHub via OAuth](../auth/index.md#github). 
```

> Once that is configured, follow [these steps to configure access permissions](../repo/permissions.md#github). Users will log into Sourcegraph using Github OAuth, and permissions will be synced in the background.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once authentication with GitHub via OAuth is configured, follow [these steps to configure access permissions](../repo/permissions.md#github). Users will log into Sourcegraph using Github OAuth, and permissions will be synced in the background.
```

Similar to the "this" convention, "that" here may be ambiguous.

### GitLab Enterprise or GiLab Cloud authentication and authorization

We support both authentication and permissions syncing (through OAuth) for GitLab. If you use GitLab as your code host, you have two available authentication flows:

1. Use SAML (or another auth mechanism) to log in to GitLab
2. Use GitLab OAuth to log in to Sourcegraph

In this way, access to Sourcegraph will still be managed by your identity provider, using the code host as a middle step. This option is the simplest to configure. To do so, [set up GitLab as an authentication option](../auth/index.md#gitlab), and then [enable permissions syncing](../repo/permissions.md#oauth-application).

> Alternatively, you can configure SAML authentication in to Sourcegraph, and use GitLab permissions syncing in the background to control access permissions. To implement this method, you will need to make sure that GitLab is able to return a value in `identities.provider` for the `GET /users` endpoint ([GitLab documentation](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/api/users.html#for-admins)) that your identity provider is able to pass as the `nameID` in the SAML response. If that isn’t possible, you will need to use the first option. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can configure SAML authentication in Sourcegraph, and use GitLab permissions syncing in the background to control access permissions. To implement this method, you will need to make sure that GitLab is able to return a value in `identities.provider` for the `GET /users` endpoint ([GitLab documentation](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/api/users.html#for-admins)) that your identity provider is able to pass as the `nameID` in the SAML response. If that isn’t possible, you will need to use the first option. 
```

To configure SAML auth with GitLab permissions, you will need to first [configure permissions from GitLab](../repo/permissions.md#administrator-sudo-level-access-token). Then, [configure SAML authentication](../auth/saml/index.md). The `nameID` passed by the identity provider will need to match the value of `identities.provider`. For example, if the GitLab API returns:

```
"identities": [
   {"provider": "saml", "extern_uid": "email@domain.com"}
]
```

You will need to configure permission in Sourcegraph as:

```
{
  "url": "https://gitlab.com",
  "token": "$PERSONAL_ACCESS_TOKEN",
  "authorization": {
    "identityProvider": {
      "type": "external",
      "authProviderID": "$AUTH_PROVIDER_ID",
      "authProviderType": "$AUTH_PROVIDER_TYPE",
      "gitlabProvider": "saml"
    }
  }
}
```

And configure the identity provider to pass the email address as the `nameID`. 

### Bitbucket Server authorization

> We do not currently support OAuth for Bitbucket Server. You will need to combine permissions syncing from Bitbucket Server with another auth mechanism (SAML, built-in auth, HTTP authentication proxies). Bitbucket Server only passes usernames to Sourcegraph, so you’ll need to make sure that those usernames are matched by whatever mechanism you chose to use for access.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We do not currently support OAuth for Bitbucket Server. You will need to combine permissions syncing from Bitbucket Server with another authentication mechanism (SAML, built-in auth, HTTP authentication proxies). Bitbucket Server only passes usernames to Sourcegraph, so you’ll need to make sure that those usernames are matched by whatever mechanism you choose to use for access.
```

> To sync Bitbucket server permissions, follow [these instructions](../repo/permissions.md#bitbucket-server). Then, do one of the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Follow the steps to [sync Bitbucket server permissions](../repo/permissions.md#bitbucket-server). Then, do one of the following:
```

1. Create the user accounts in Sourcegraph with matching usernames. (Access using `builtin` auth.)

> 2. [Configure SAML authentication](../auth/saml/index.md). If you are using Bitbucket Server, the `login` attribute is *not* optional—you need to pass the Bitbucket Server username as the `login` attribute. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. [Configure SAML authentication](../auth/saml/index.md). If you are using Bitbucket Server, the `login` attribute is *not* optional. You need to pass the Bitbucket Server username as the `login` attribute. 
```

3. [Configure an HTTP authentication proxy](../auth/index.md#http-authentication-proxies), passing the Bitbucket Server username value as the `usernameHeader`. 

### Explicit Permissions API authorization

> With any authentication mechanism, you can use our GraphQL API to set permissions for all repositories. If you choose to do this, this is the *only* mechanism that can be used for permissions—all others will be ignored. Follow [these instructions](../repo/permissions.md#explicit-permissions-api) for the mutations needed within the GraphQL API to configure access.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With any authentication mechanism, you can use our GraphQL API to set permissions for all repositories. If you choose to do this, this is the *only* mechanism that can be used for permissions—all others will be ignored. Follow the instructions for the [mutations needed within the GraphQL API](../repo/permissions.md#explicit-permissions-api) to configure access.
```

### OpenID Connect authentication

> Use this option if accessing using OpenID Connect, such as when logging in through a Google Workspace, or if other auth methods aren’t an option. [See setup instructions here](../auth/index.md#openid-connect). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use OpenID Connect authentication if accessing using OpenID Connect, such as when logging in through a Google Workspace, or if other authentication methods aren’t an option. See [how to set up OpenID Connect authentication](../auth/index.md#openid-connect).
```

### HTTP authentication proxy authentication

> This is not generally recommended unless this is a common authentication process within your organization. [See configuration instructions here](../auth/index.md#http-authentication-proxies). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
HTTP authentication proxy authentication is not generally recommended unless it's a common authentication process within your organization. See [how to configure HTTP authentication proxies](../auth/index.md#http-authentication-proxies).
```
